File ITR-4 (Sugam) Online User Manual 
   1. Overview The pre-filling and filing of ITR-4 service is available to registered users on the e-Filing portal and through accessing the offline utility. This service enables individual taxpayers, HUFs, and firms (other than LLPs) to file ITR-4 online through the e-Filing portal. This user manual covers the process for filing ITR-4 through the online mode . 2. Prerequisites for availing this service General Registered user on the e-Filing portal with valid user ID and password Status of PAN is active Others Please note : If your PAN is not linked with your Aadhaar, your PAN is made inoperative. In that case you will get a ticker message “Your PAN is made inoperative as it is not linked with Aadhaar. Some of the accesses may be limited. You can link and make your PAN operative after payment u/s 234H.” Link PAN and Aadhaar ( recommended ). Pre-validate at least one bank account and nominate it for refund (recommended) Valid mobile number linked with Aadhaar / e-Filing portal / your bank / NSDL / CDSL (for e-Verification) Download the offline utility or avail a third-party software (If using offline mode) 3. Form at a Glance ITR-4 has six sections that you need to fill before submitting the form in online mode and a preview page where you can validate all your details filled. The sections are as follows: Personal Information Gross Total Income Disclosures and Exempt Income Total Deductions Taxes Paid Total Tax Liability Here is a quick tour of the various sections of ITR-4: 3.1 Personal Information In the Personal Information section of the ITR, you need to verify the data which is auto-filled from your e-Filing profile. You will not be able to edit some of your personal data directly in the form. However, you can make the necessary changes by going to your e-Filing profile. You can edit your contact details, filing type details, authorized representative, partner details (if applicable) and bank details in your e-Filing profile. 3.2 Gross Total Income In the Gross Total Income section, you need to review the pre-filled information and verify your income source details from salary / pension, house property, business or profession and other sources (such as interest income, family pension, etc.). You will also be required to enter the remaining / additional details if any. Note: Some parts of this section will be greyed off depending on whether you're an HUF or a firm (other than LLP). 3.3 Disclosures and Exempt Income In the Disclosures and Exempt Income section, you need to provide details of financial particulars related to business, information regarding gross receipts reported for GST (Optional) and exempt income. . 3.4 Total Deductions In the Total Deductions section, you need to add and verify any deductions you need to claim under Chapter VI-A of the Income Tax Act. 3.5 Taxes Paid In the Taxes Paid section, you need to verify taxes paid by you in the previous year. Tax details include TDS from Salary / Other than Salary as furnished by the Payer, TCS, Advance Tax, and Self-Assessment Tax. 3.6 Total Tax Liability In the Total Tax Liability section, you will be able to view your computation of income, computation of tax, and total tax, cess and interest. You need to check your tax liability details as per the sections you filled previously in the computation of tax section. Note: For more details, refer to the validation rules for ITR-4 issued by CBDT for AY 2023-24. Refer CBDT__e-Filing_ITR-4_Validation Rules_Version 1.0.pdf (incometax.gov.in) 4. How to Access and Submit ITR 4 You can file and submit your ITR through following methods: Online Mode – through e-Filing portal Offline Mode – through offline Utility Follow the steps below to file and submit the ITR through online mode : Step 1: Log in to the e-Filing portal using your user ID and password. Step 2: On your Dashboard , click e-File > Income Tax Returns > File Income Tax Return. Note: If your PAN is inoperative, you will get a warning message that your PAN is inoperative as its not link ed with the Aadhaar. You can click on Link Now button to link PAN with the A adhaar , otherwise click Continue . Step 3: Select Assessment Year as 2023 – 24 and Mode of Filing as online and click Continue. Note: In case you have already filled the Income Tax Return and it is pending for submission, click Resume Filing. In case you wish to discard the saved return and start preparing the return afresh, click Start New Filing. Step 4: Select Status as applicable to you and click Continue to proceed further. Step 5: You have two options to select the type of Income Tax Return: If you are not sure which ITR to file, you may opt for wizard-based return filing by clicking on Proceed button.Once the system helps you determine the correct ITR, you can proceed with filing your ITR. If you are sure which ITR to file, select the applicable Income Tax Return from the dropdown and click Proceed with ITR-4. Note: • In case you are not aware which ITR or schedules are applicable to you or income and deductions details, your answers in response to a set of questions will guide you in determining the same and help in correct / error-free filing of ITR. • In case you are aware of the ITR or schedules applicable to you or Income and deductions details, you can skip the questionnaire. Step 6: Read the instructions to fill the form carefully and note the list of documents needed and click Let's Get Started . Step 7: Review your pre-filled data and edit it if necessary. Enter the remaining / additional data (if required) and click Confirm at the end of each section. Note: All the questions related to Section 115BAC are to be answered from the perspective of returns filed with business income. Select the relevant answers, by ignoring the contents of the non-business returns filed, if any in between A.Ys, and based on the contents of the business returns filed. If the assessee had opted for the new tax regime in the latest business return, it will continue to be under new tax regime, unless opted out through filing Form 10IE for the current assessment year. If you wish to opt New Tax regime you have to select the Opting in Now (if you have never opted in earlier assessment years) or Continue to opt (if you have opted in earlier years) radio button in filing section under Personal Information tab. For Opting in Now , enter the Acknowledgement No. and date of filing of Form 10 IE as Form 10 IE is mandatory to be filed before filing ITR if person is having business income and opting for new tax regime for the first time. Step 8a: Select Yes in Have you ever opted for new tax regime in earlier years if you have opted for New Tax Regime in earlier years else select No . If Yes is selected, then choose the AY, enter date of filing of form 10 IE and enter the Acknowledgement number. Step 8b: If after opting in for new tax regime in earlier years, in later year you have opted out of new tax regime, select Yes in Have you ever opted out of new tax regim e, else select No . If yes, then select the AY, date of filing of form 10 IE and enter the Acknowledgement number. Step 8c : If you have not opted for the New Tax regime in earlier years, select No and select the Opting in now option for current year (if you want to opt in for New Tax Regime) else select Not Opting . Step 8d: If you opt for new tax regime, you will see a pop that you will not be eligible for some deductions and allowances. Click Proceed . Step 8e: Enter the Acknowledgement No. and date of filing of Form 10IE as it is the prerequisite to opt new tax regime for the person who is having business income. Step 9: Enter your income and deduction details in the different sections. After completing and confirming all the sections of the form, click Proceed . Step 10: In case there is a tax liability: You will be shown a summary of your tax computation based on the details you provided. If there is tax liability payable based on the computation, you will get the Pay Now and Pay Later options at the bottom of the page. It is recommended to use Pay Now option. If you opt for Pay Later , you can make the payment after filing your Income Tax Return, but there is a risk of being considered as an assessee in default, and liability to pay interest on tax payable may arise. Step 11: In case there is no tax liability (No Demand / No Refund) or if you are eligible for a Refund co mputation, you will be taken to the Preview Return page. Step 12: After successful payment through e-Filing portal, a success message is displayed. Click Back to Return Filing to complete filing of ITR. Step 13: Click Preview Return. Step 14: On the Preview and Submit Your Return page, place , name and other details will be auto populated. Select the declaration checkbox and click Proceed to Preview. Note : If you have not involved a tax return preparer or TRP in preparing your return, you can leave the textboxes related to TRP blank. Step 15: Preview your return and click Proceed to Validation . Step 16: Once validated, click Proceed to Verification . Note: You will be shown a list of validation errors in your return, if any. You need to go back to the form to correct the errors. If there are no errors, you can proceed to e-Verify your return by clicking Proceed to Verification . Step 17: On the Complete your Verification page, select your preferred option and click Continue . It is mandatory to verify your return, and e-Verification (recommended option – e-Verify Now) is the easiest way to verify your ITR – it is quick, paperless, and safer than sending a signed physical ITR-V to CPC by speed post. Note: If your PAN is inoperative, you will see a warning message in pop-up that PAN of the taxpayer is inoperative as it is not linked with Aadhaar . You can link PAN with Aadhaar by clicking on Link Now option, otherwise you click on Continue. Note: In case you select e-Verify Later , you can submit your return. However, you will be required to verify your return within 30 days of filing of your ITR. Step 18: On the e-Verify page, select the option through which you want to e-Verify the return and click Continue . Note: • Refer to How to e-Verify user manual to learn more. • If you select Verify via ITR-V, you need to send a signed physical copy of your ITR-V to Centralized Processing Center, Income Tax Department, Bengaluru 560500 by normal / speed post within 30 days. • Please make sure you have pre-validated your bank account so that any refunds due maybe credited to your bank account. • Refer to My Bank Account user manual to learn more. Once you e-Verify your return, a success message is displayed along with the Transaction ID and Acknowledgement Number. You will also receive a confirmation message on your mobile number and email ID registered on the e-Filing portal. 4. Related Topics Login My Profile Register Yourself Authorize/Register as Representative Forgot Password? Dashboard My Bank Account Generate EVC Offline Utility Income tax forms (Upload) ITR Status How to e-Verify 