File ITR-1 (Sahaj) Online User Manual 
   1. Overview The pre-filling and filing of ITR-1 service is available to registered users on the e-Filing portal. This service enables individual taxpayers to file ITR-1 either online through the e-Filing portal or by accessing the offline excel utility. This user manual covers the process for filing ITR-1 through the online mode. 2. Prerequisites for availing this service General Registered user on the e-Filing portal with valid user ID and password Status of PAN is active Others PAN and Aadhaar are linked. Please Note: If your PAN is not linked with your Aadhaar, your PAN is made inoperative. In that case you will get a ticker message “Your PAN is made inoperative as it is not linked with Aadhaar. Some of the accesses may be limited. You can link and make your PAN operative after payment u/s 234H.” Pre-validate at least one bank account and nominate it for refund (recommended) Valid mobile number linked with Aadhaar / e-Filing portal / your bank / NSDL / CDSL (for e-Verification) Download the offline utility or avail a third-party software (If using offline mode) 3. Form at a Glance ITR-1 has five pre-filed sections that you need to validate/ edit before submitting it, and one summary section where you are required to review your tax computation. The sections are as follows : Personal Information Gross Total Income Total Deductions Tax Paid Total Tax Liability Here is a quick tour of the various sections of ITR-1: 3.1 Personal Information In the Personal Information section of the ITR, you need to validate the pre-filled data which is auto-filled from your e-Filing profile. You will not be able to edit some of your personal data directly in the form. However, can make the necessary changes by going to your e-Filing profile. You can edit your contact details, filing type details and bank details in the form . 3.2 Gross Total Income In the Gross Total Income section, you need to review the pre-filled information and confirm/ edit your income source details from salary / pension, house property, and other sources (such as interest income, family pension, etc.). You can also add details of exempt income, if any. 3.3 Total Deductions In the Total Deductions section, you need to add, delete, and confirm any deductions applicable to you to claim under Chapter VI-A of the Income Tax Act . 3.4 Tax Paid In the Tax Paid section, you need to confirm taxes paid by you in the previous year. Tax details include TDS from Salary / Other than Salary as furnished by Payer(s), TCS, Advance Tax and Self-Assessment Tax . 3.5 Total Tax Liability In the Total Tax Liability section, you need to review tax liability computed as per the validated sections. Note: For more details, refer to the validation rules for ITR-1 issued by CBDT for AY 2023-24. Refer CBDT__e-Filing_ITR-1_Validation Rules_Version 1.0.pdf (incometax.gov.in) 4. How to Access and Submit ITR - 1 You can file and submit your ITR through the following methods: Online Mode – through e-Filing portal Offline Mode – through Offline Utility Follow the below steps to file and submit the ITR through online mode : Step 1: Log in to the e-Filing portal using your user ID and password. Step 2: On your Dashboard , click e-File > Income Tax Returns > File Income Tax Return. Note: If your PAN is inoperative , you will get a warning message that your PAN is inoperative as its not linked with the Aadhaar. You can click on Link Now button to link PAN with the Aadhaar otherwise click Continue . Step 3: Select Assessment Year as 2023–24 and Mode of filling as Online , then click Continue. Step 4: In case you have already filled the Income Tax Return and it is pending for submission, click Resume Filing. In case you wish to discard the saved return and start preparing the return afresh,click Start New Filing . Step 5: Select Status as applicable to you and click Continue to proceed further. Step 6: You have two options to select the type of Income Tax Return: •    If you know which ITR to file, select the ITR form; else •    If you are not sure which ITR to file, you may select H elp me decide which ITR Form to file and click Proceed . Here the system helps you determine the correct ITR, then you can proceed with filing your ITR. Note: In case you are not aware which ITR or schedules are applicable to you or income and deductions details, your answers in response to a set of questions will guide in determining the same and help you in correct / error free filing of ITR. In case you are aware of the ITR or schedules applicable to you or income and deduction details, you can skip the questions. Step 7: Once you have selected the ITR applicable to you, note the list of documents needed and click Let’s Get Started . Step 8: Select the checkbox applicable to you regarding reason for filing ITR and click Continue. Step 9: In case you wish to opt for New Tax Regime, select Yes in the Personal Information section. Please note the pop-up information that certain deductions and exemptions are not available in the new tax regime. Review your pre-filled data and edit it if necessary. Enter the remaining / additional data (if required). Click Confirm at the end of each section Step 10: Enter/ Edit your income and total deductions details in the different sections. After completing and confirming all the sections of the form, click Proceed . Step 10a: In case there is a tax liability After clicking on total tax liability, you will be shown a summary of your tax computation based on the details provided by you. If there is tax liability payable based on the computation, you will get the Pay Now and Pay Later options at the bottom of the page . Note: It is recommended to use the Pay Now option. If you opt to Pay Later , you can make the payment after filing your Income Tax Return, but there is a risk of being considered as taxpayer in default, and liability to pay interest on tax payable may arise . Step 10b: In case there is no tax liability (No Demand / No Refund) or if you are eligible for a Refund Click Preview Return . If there is no tax liability payable, or if there is a refund based on tax computation, you will be taken to the Preview and Submit Your Return page. Step 11: If you click on Pay Now , you will be redirected to e-pay Tax service. Click Continue. Note: • You will be taken to e-Pay Tax page on the portal for making tax payment after you click Continue. Refer to e-Pay Tax user manuals to learn more. Step 12 : After successful payment through e-Filing portal, a success message is displayed. Click Back to Return Filing to complete filing of ITR . Step 13: Click Preview Return. Step 14: On the Preview and Submit Your Return page, select the declaration checkbox and click Proceed to Preview. Note: If you have not involved a tax return preparer or TRP in preparing your return, you can leave the textboxes related to TRP blank. Step 15: Preview your return and click Proceed to Validation. Step 16: Once validated, on your Preview and Submit your Return pag e, click Proceed to Verification. Note: If you are shown a list of errors in your return, you need to go back to the form to correct the errors. If there are no errors, you can proceed to e-Verify your return by clicking Proceed to Verification. Step 17: On the Complete your Verification page , select your preferred option and click Continue . It is mandatory to verify your return, and e-Verification (recommended option – e-Verify Now ) is the easiest way to verify your ITR – it is quick, paperless, and safer than sending a signed physical ITR-V to CPC by speed post. Note: If your PAN is inoperative, you will see a warning message in pop-up that PAN of the taxpayer is inoperative as it is not linked with Aadhaar . You can link PAN with Aadhaar by clicking on Link Now option otherwise click Continue. Note: In case you select e-Verify Later , you can submit your return, however, you will be required to verify your return within 30 days of filing of your ITR. Step 18: On the e-Verify page, select the option through which you want to e-Verify the return and click Continue. Note: Refer to How to e-Verify user manual to learn more. If you select Verify via ITR-V , you need to send a signed physical copy of your ITR-V to Centralized Processing Center, Income Tax Department, Bengaluru 560500 by speed post within 30 days. Please make sure you have pre-validated your bank account so that any refunds due maybe credited to your bank account. Refer to My Bank Account user manual to learn more. Once you e-Verify your return, a success message is displayed along with the Transaction ID and Acknowledgement Number. You will also receive a confirmation message on your mobile number and email ID registered on the e-Filing portal. 4. Related Topics Login My Profile Register Yourself Reset Password Dashboard My Bank Account How to e-Verify Generate EVC Income tax forms  (Upload) Offline Utility ITR Status 